= The Tao of Resource
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4


In Eclipse, the notion of a tool disappears. In its place, is the idea
of a universal tool platform - an open, extensible IDE - where tool
plug-ins are added to extend the capabilities of the platform. These
plug-ins "teach" Eclipse how to work with things - java files, web
content, graphics, video - almost anything you can imagine. At an
implementation level, these plug-ins communicate using resources
(projects, folders, and files). The resource is the common medium for
integration between plugins and external tools.

The resource concept was developed for a number of reasons:

  1. Integration between a plug-in from one vendor, and a plug-in from
another, is possible only if there is a common, well known data
abstraction.
  2. Integration with external tools is possible only if everything, at
some level, is a file.

Resources are also important at the UI level. If an object command,
decorator, or property page contribution is made to an IResource, the
platform will ensure that this contribution is visible in any view or
editor where the resource appears. For instance, a .java file will be
visible in the Navigator, the Hierarchy view, and the Packages view. To
the user, the .java file is the same object, regardless of the view
where it appears, so the object appearance, context menu, and properties
should be consistent in each view.

In some cases, the implementation of a particular view or editor may
wrap a resource within another object, for presentation purposes. If the
wrapper is equivalent to a resource, it is important to expose this
equivalence to the platform. If the resource is exposed, the platform
may apply resource contributions to the resource equivalent object. This
ensures presentation consistency for an object in the platform.

The underlying resource for an object is exposed by implementing
IAdaptable on the model object, and answering an
IContributorResourceAdapter. For more information on the implementation
of an IContributorResourceAdapter, refer to Eclipse Corner.

TIP: [guideline17.1]*Guideline 17.1* +
Expose the resource for resource equivalent model objects using an
IContributorResourceAdapter.